z5-tracker: Zelda 5 item and location helper program

Note: At time of writing, this program has undergone very little testing. Beware bugs.

Keywords: map tracker, item tracker, hint tracker, multi-platform, Python 3, Zelda 5, Ocarina of Time

Overview:
z5-tracker allows you to mark found items and checked locations for The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time. It is primarily meant to be used with the item randomiser created by AmazingAmpharos in 2018, but can also be used for a normal playthrough.
It is not a walkthrough. It does assume that you know where each item location is situated and which items are required to reach it. A beginner still might find it useful, although additional help will be required from other sources.

Note for Windows:
You will need to install Python. Get it at https://www.python.org/downloads/. Once that is done, you can just run 'z5-tracker.py' (double clicking it should suffice).
Special note for macOS:
Neither do I have any experience with macOS nor do I have access to an installation for testing. So I am entirely unaware as to the way to go around running Python 3 programs on that platform. That said, z5-tracker should run, but I've no way to test this.
Yet another note (for all systems):
z5-tracker is available on Pypi. I recommend installing it via 'pip3 install --user z5-tracker'.

Usage:
z5-tracker is written in Python 3 and requires at least version 3.6. Run it from z5-tracker's root folder (the one with this readme) by executing 'z5tracker.py' or -- if you installed it via setup.py -- by just launching z5-tracker from anywhere.
So far, it has only been tested on Linux -- specifically under Xfce using CPython 3.6 (with a very basic startup test on Windows). However, since it does not use any external dependencies, every distribution of CPython 3.6 or higher should be able to run it, including on non-Linux operating systems. I don't have much experience with alternative Python implementations, but if they include the required libraries -- especially tkinter -- then they should work, too.
Please note that on any non-Windows system a folder $HOME/.z5-tracker is created on start-up. This folder is used to store some configurations and should be of negligible size. The corresponding location in Windows is $LOCALAPPDATA\z5-tracker.
Once you've started z5-tracker, you probably want to adjust the 'Rules string' setting in the options. This defines the rules applied to item locations and can be copied straight from the randomiser GUI. Don't forget to restart after changing this option. Fair warning: You probably want to avoid using rule strings which contain randomised settings. After all, z5-tracker has no idea what the randomiser might have chosen.

Limitations:
This helper program is considered fully functional, but has a lot of rough edges. These can be understood as little quirks that would take a disproportionate amount of effort to remove -- I basically don't consider them annoying enough to spend a lot of time fixing them. (Most of these quirks are described further on in this readme.)
As general advice, whenever you change settings or something doesn't seem to work correctly, a restart of the program should be considered. No progress will be lost since z5-tracker autosaves the current state.

Licence:
This program code is distributed under MIT licence. All artwork is under copyright owned by Nintendo. The author of this program is not affiliated with Nintendo in any way.


MAQ (mostly anticipated questions):

- Aren't there already programs like this?
None I liked.

- Why don't you provide a Windows binary (i.e. EXE file)?
Because I do not know how. I've tried a few of the options available but none worked for me (at least on that virtual machine I had available to me). They all seem to be geared towards simple Python scripts.
If you know how to do it and/or wish to do so, feel free to contact me so that I can add them to the repository.

- Why can't I change option 'X'?
A few entries are just shown for information and not meant to be changed. (You can always edit the settings file directly, but I won't support this.)

- I changed the settings. How can I make it have any effect?
Restart z5-tracker.

- z5-tracker seems to be assume closed Door of Time. How do I change that?
Change the 'Rules string' setting. Take the 'Setting String' from the randomiser GUI and paste it in the options. You should probably make sure that the string you use is the same as the one used to patch your game (or at least that you know the differences). Then restart the program.
A note regarding changing age: Contrary to what one might expect, the ability to switch from child to adult and vise versa is not linked to being able to access the Master Sword Pedestal but rather posessing the Master Sword. That's just how the randomiser works. So if you play with open Door of Time, mark Master Sword right from the start to enable displaying locations on both maps.

- Is scrubshuffle/shopsanity/cowsanity/skullsanity supported?
Scrubshuffle, shopsanity and cowsanity should be available -- all related item locations exist. You have to adjust the 'Rules string' option and mark the settings to show all scrubs/shops/cows. This is, however, even less well tested than normal mode.
As for skullsanity, skulltula locations are already available and dungeon item counting does take skullsanity into account. The only real issue might be that overworld skulltulas are still shown on separate maps. In order to keep these maps legible, this will stay that way.

- Master Quest?
I've never played anything but the original N64 release of Zelda 5. I therefore do not know anything about Master Quest. That said, supporting it shouldn't be too hard. If somebody can provide me with maps of those dungeons and the pixel coordinates of item locations, I would be willing to include them.

- Entrance randomiser?
Currently not. z5-tracker actually contains all the backend required for implementing entrace tracking, but it still requires a front-end. Unfortunately, that is still quite a bit of work, so no promises. However, if it comes to be, it will probably not be tested very well, since I'm already struggling with limited time. (Testing actually takes the brunt of my time on this project.)

- Why does this program open so many windows?
I chose a multi-window layout to give flexibility to the program layout. I understand that especially in Microsoft Windows this might feel awkward. However, I feel that the benefit outweighs the cost.

- Why does this program look so ugly?
Well, I can't really refute that statement. In all honesty, I'm not really at home in user-space programming and even much less so with regards to (graphical) user interfaces. In the end, the main issue people might have with the program's appearance comes down to me using Tk. I use Tk because it is the one GUI toolkit that is always available in standard Python installations and because I care more about functionality than looks.

- Is there a way to make the maps larger?
You can edit the 'Map size' option. Just put in any number you want. Note that using very small values (i.e. less than 0.25) will probably cause issues. Also note that this option has a direct impact on computing required to open any map. Good numbers in this regard are 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, ...

- An item location is shown as unavailable, but I know a trick/glitch to reach it anyway. Wouldn't it be possible to somehow show it as available?
I previously planned to use the upcoming glitched ruleset to implement this, but now that it is slowly materialising I can see that this might be a little bit too extreme. I honestly don't know how to approach this anymore, so I'm open for suggestions.
Remember: It is always possible to adjust the 'Rules string' setting to include certain locations.

- I have Slingshot but no Bow. Why is Dodongo's Cavern marked as fully available on the adult map?
This used to be an issue with all locations -- they were marked as available on all maps even if only one age had the required items. When I resolved this I consciously left dungeons out. This is because of Spirit Temple, which spans both ages by design. Dodongo's Cavern is left as the only dungeon suffering from this decision. I find that acceptable since most of the time people will do their utmost to finish Dodongo's Cavern as adult and won't care about having or not having a bow.

- Why are some locations in the skulltula house marked as unavailable despite having the necessary tokens?
You probably have entered rules in the settings which exclude requiring a set amount of skulltullas (or any). Locations which have been disabled in the randomiser rules will never show up as available -- unless you mark the option 'Show disabled locations'. (Don't forget to restart.)

- There are a lot of skulltulas marked as unavailable despite clearly having access to them.
Is the option that nighttime skulltulas require Sun Song enabled? This will have exactly this effect. Remember that it is always possible to set a rules string different from the one used to created the randomised game in order to adjust the location display to one's needs.

- The heartpiece in the big pot in Goron City is shown as 'visible'? That can't be right.
As pointed out in the config window, the entire 'visible' functionality is very unreliable. What's basically happening is that the randomiser is marking everything as visible that's a freestanding heart-piece. Since there isn't actually much reason for the randomiser to have any sort of visibility check, I don't expect this to change. Hence, this function will probably remain as it is which is why I made it an option.

- There are Gossip Stones missing at Temple of Time and in the Sacred Meadow maze.
I assume that anybody checking these will check all four/two of them, so I only placed a single stone for both locations.

- Does marking the Stone of Agony have any effect?
No.

- I rescued one carpenter and the bridge has been repaired. Why does the map show Haunted Wasteland as unavailable?
At time of writing, this is a limitation. Just click the button three more times to set the rescued carpenters to four and it will become available.
I might fix this by replacing the button with a single 'all carpenters rescued' one.

- Something is wrong with the key count at Fire Temple/Water Temple. It seems I always need one key too many for each location.
This a result of one locked door having been removed. The randomiser rules internally deal with this by adding one key to the inventory by default. For the time being, just add another small key.
Note: It appears as if randomiser version 5.0 will remove this quirk. Expect z5-tracker to follow suit as soon as it's updated.

- Shadow and Spirit Temple/Medallions are in the wrong order.
No, they are not. They are exactly in their natural order, which is as they are obtained/cleared in a normal playthrough.

- Why are there three different types of bottles?
Because there aren't any better icons. The buttons for Ruto's letter and Big Poes therefore show a bottle. Marking them has no effect on the rules regarding bottles -- you will have to click the bottle icon, too.

- Will you support TestrunnerSRL's randomiser fork?
Given that a lot of people now consider this fork 'official', I do follow suit. I will, however, only support the master branch. If you wish compatibility with a development version, you can always add a ruleset package yourself. However, be aware that you have to edit the import lines. Unlike z5-tracker, the randomiser is not packaged. (Fair warning to those who didn't believe me and found the 'next' branch: It's entirely untested.)

- The item location names seem to miss apostrophes.
The names used are precisely the same as the ones in spoiler logs. I believe everybody will be happier if I don't invent another set of location names.

- I found a bug.
Great. First, if it is a bug regarding location accessibility, please make sure that you aren't missing something. I strongly suggest reading up on it here: https://github.com/TestRunnerSRL/OoT-Randomizer/wiki/faq-broken-seed-glitchless
If you're still sure, create a bug report on Github and provide all files from '$HOME/.z5-tracker'.

- Will you include feature 'X'?
Maybe? If you have any suggestions, contact me.


Contact:
My Github repository is probably the best way to reach me. I'll try to check it regularly. I am also around on the newly created Reddit (/r/zootr).

Credits:
I'd like to credit hamsda and his Zelda 5 tracker for a lot of inspirations. In fact, many of the location positions are strongly influenced by his database. And to top it off, most of the icons I use are from his repository. A shame I don't feel comfortable with the Emotracker framework.
There is also crossproduct's tracker for Zelda 3, which provided additional inspiriation. I've never understood the existence of trackers while playing Zelda 3, but I finally came to appreciate them in Zelda 5.
Then there is the wonderful individual under the name Peardian, who has created these gorgeous dungeon maps I am using. I consider his work to be the best maps for Ocarina of Time out there, so check them out at 'www.vgmaps.com/Atlas/N64/index.htm#LegendOfZeldaOcarinaOfTime'.
And finally of course, the whole team behind AmazingAmpharos' Zelda 5 randomiser. Not only is this program specifically written for it, I also re-use several files from their source code -- basically the entire backbone of z5-tracker. (Just no more big overhauls like the one when moving from version 3 to 4, please!)
